Previously in Etrange escales (extraordinary expeditions) we were in Rome
and I don't know if you are aware that the only other city paired up with Rome
is Paris !  and vice versa.
According to the saying :  "Only Paris lives up to Rome
and only Rome lives up to Paris."
Our next destination was then pretty obvious.
The dilemna with the French capital
is that it is so rich and so diverse that we can  approach it
through countless facets
Historical Paris, Nightlife, Fashion
Food, Art...
As you are starting to guess, it is a weirder and lesser known Paris that
I am going to talk about now
.
So if you want to know what is lying in the shadows of the city of light
Follow the guide.
Centuries go by, the world changes but the aura of legend
surrounding Paris remains the same
with averageley more than 30 millions visitors each year
the French capital never stops being one of the world's most visited city.
this tourist attractivity is mostly due to its monuments: counting up to 2185, no less
Some are among the most famous of the globe
Our journey starts in front of the most visited one
And no, it's not the one you are thinking of
The Notre-Dame cathedral attracts more than 12 millions visitors each year
making it not only the most visited monument of Paris
but of Europe as well
And yet, among the thousands of people  gathering in front of the gothic cathedral each day
very few actually notice the oddity on its forecourt
This little compass rose engraved in bronze is not only fullfilling a decorative fonction
it is actually the reference point for all roads in France
It means all the roads lenghts and distances from Paris
to the other cities in the country are calculated from this point.
The metal sheet was set up in 1924 but
it was removed in 1966 to build an underground parking lot
However the works led to important archaeological discoveries
under the forecourt of Notre-Dame. Works were then stopped
and the compass rose was finally put back in 1972.
A few minutes from the cathedral, in the René Viviani square
another monument raises. A vegetal one.
15 metres high, this locust was planted in 1601
making it the oldest tree in Paris
It's arched-back demonstrates the weight of time
and a concrete structure was built to support it.
This natural treasure is being well-taken care of
and is, since 2010, surrounded by a protective fence
Despite this venerable elder being 400 years old
the oldest house in Paris was almost
200 years old already when it was planted.
It's located on the 51, Montmorency street
and was built in 1407 by the mysterious
Nicolas Flamel
Flamel was a rich bourgeois
from Paris, who built a lot of housing
for the destitute. The Montmorency house is the only one that survived times
and on its pediment, renovated in 1900
one can still read the original inscription
It indicates that in return for bed and lodging, the inhabitants were to
pray everyday. To explain the wealth of Nicholas Flamel
the rumour made him an alchemist
that discovered a way
to turn lead into gold. This myth grew over time
turning Flamel into a leading figure
of esoteric litterature. And even more.
He is even mentionned in the first Harry Potter's volume
Nowadays, Nicholas Flamel's house is now a restaurant
and the only alchemy taking place here is food related.
When you linger though the streets of Paris with curiosity
you always end up finding an unusual detail
-"Unusual, mate, that's exactly the word. Yeah I'm reading his mind.
Hey, come this way if you want to see something strange in Paris, it's here !
To be honest, I never understood this thing !"
If that telepath passerby is so confused
it is because of the discrepency between the modern architecture of those buildings
and the flamboyance of their ornaments
On each sides of the street, coming out of nowhere
a naked woman and a stag-head man are holding balconies
Those statues were sculpted in 1987 by the artist Philippe Rebuffet
and they are rewriting a classic scene of greek mythology
the meeting of Diana (Artemis) and Actaeon
The myths goes that while hunting in the woods, the hunter Actaeon
stumbled upon the goddess Diana taking a bath
Enraged at the thoughts of being seen naked by a mere mortal
she turned him into a stag
Actaeon's own hounds then mistook him for game
and turned against him. As you can see here.
However a question remains:
Why choosing this precise location to illustrate such a scene?
Simply because we are located at the
"Small deer alley" (Passage du petit-cerf)
Paris is full of surprising fronts like this one
Rue Saint Lazare you can even see a MacDonald's which front
is classified as an historical building
but to my knowledge the most remarkable front of the city
is located on Avenue Rapp
At number 29 the Lavirotte building
is a residential building that was built between 1900 and 1901
by the architect Jules Lavirotte
6-floor-high
the building is adorned with splendid Art Nouveau ornaments
contrasting radically next to the other buildings
Its asymetrical front is covered with ceramic and abundant decors
But it is certainly the main entrance that is the most impressive part of it all
Framed by elaborate designs, this spectacular entrance
is watched over by the bust of a mysterious woman
It is said to be the Architect's wife.
The Lavirotte building won an award in the Paris front contest in 1901
in the Paris front contest in 1901
And nowadays, almost 120 years later
Passerby still stop to take a look at it.
Talking about curious people
We are going to visit
a cabinet of curiosities
but not any cabinet of curiosities
At 46 Rue du Bac, Deyrolle's House is the last Parisian cabinet of curiosities,
opened to the public, and it is also one of the oldest shop in the city
founded in 1831
Halfway between a natural history museum and an art gallery
Deyrolle is an instititution when it comes to taxidermia
And when you reach the first floor
you are greeted by a fascinating sight
Big cats, peacocks, giraffes,
The visitor is surrounded by stuffed animals.
Offering a unique athmosphere as one gets further inside.
I'll emphasize than no animal has been killed prior being displayed here.
Deyrolles stuffed animals died from natural causes
either in zoo, parks or natural reserve.
The place is just as renowned for its remarkable bug collection
In the entomology room, one can open hundred of drawers
filled with butterflies, spiders, and beetles.
Once again, even if it does look a lot like a museum,
Deyrolle is really a store, and everything that is displayed there can be bought,
much to the delight of collectors.
But this incredible place barely survived a few years ago.
February 1st, 2008, a fire destroyed more than 90% of the collection, bugs and animals alike.
Right away, lots of people
helped save the shop. And today, like a phoenix,
Deyrolle's house rise up from ashes.
The place where I lead you now is very much alike
this spirit of cabinet of curiosities
But with two major differencies
First of all, this is real museum. And the collections seen
are more... organic. But before...
It looks like...
Patrick ?
What are you doing here ?
I'm doing my satanic invocations
- Ok
- Because we are at Impasse Satan if you haven't seen it
Ah yes ! That's true
- Yes, and do you know the story behind it?
- Not at all
- Let me tell you now because you can't do more bizarre
- How interesting!
- So, in 1907, it was a private road
- Ok
- in which lived a humorist, and as we are near the Passage Dieu (Passage of God)
He decided to name his private road l'Impasse Satan (Satan dead-end)
- Good catch!
- A humorist pun
We like it
The townhall didn't care, it was a private road
And in 1991, when it became a public road
The town kept the name of Impasse Satan
- And now it's still called Impasse Satan of Paris
- The perfect place for
- any incantation
- It's perfect. I come here
to do all my satanic rituals, and it relieves me
That and stoping eating meat...
- Thank you very much for this story
- With pleasure
It's unbelievable to meet you here. See you later !
- See you next time.
- I'm going back to my stuff
Chating with this young satanic adept, I realise
that Paris streets and their features deserve their own video
Here, for exemple, we are climbing the Rue des degrés (uncommon word for steps)
Its name comes from its unique feature : a stair
of 14 steps
The street is only 5.76m long
It's the shortest street of Paris
Let's return to the subject, and not any kind of subject
The museum I was speaking of earlier is located at the Veterinary School
of Maisons Alfort
Fragonard Musuem is one of the oldest musuem in France
It opened in 1766, along with the school
which, that being said, is the second veterinary school to be created
Just after the creation of the Lyon school
The musuem hosts more than 4200 subjects in tall
display cases and is divided in four rooms
The first room is dedicated to Comparative anatomy
You can see a great number of organs that helped students when learning anatomy differences
between several species. Most of these
pieces are plaster reproductions realised more than one century ago
one century ago by the assistant Eugène Petitcolin
Some of them are so realistic that they are considered as much pieces
of art as scientific subjects
A part of the collection is dedicated to Teratology
or the study of monsters
There is a selection of congenital abnormalities like two-headed calves
or five-legged sheep
Beyond the freak-show effect, these specimens
helped the vets-to-be to accustom themselves with
the freak of Nature
The second room present a gigantic collection of skeletons
some of them three centuries old
You can see horses' skeletons, cows, various domestic
animals but also less expected species
a rhinoceros, an elephant and even a giraffe
Fortunately, the room is very high
In the third room, dedicated to pathology,
you can see a series of illness from the past like
tuberculosis lesions, an illness that also touched animals
and mankind. You can also find a fantastic collection
of bezoar. This name, you can use back
during parties, refers to
the concretions that grows inside ruminants' stomach
to which were attributed magical attributes a long time ago
Before entering the fourth and last room, please be aware if you are too sensible
If you can find one of the most staggering vision of Paris
this room is also the more nightmarish of them
In half obscurity, the Flayed Cabinet
contains the masterpieces of the museum
The ones that gave him his reputation : The Flayed figures
of Fragonard
Honoré Fragonard was an anatomist particularly known for
his corpses preservation technique
-"It really is a stag head.
-Aah yeah a stag, with the antlers
-because it's the small dear alley, so it makes sense"
-"Small dear... Obviously.."
-"Aaah !"
-"Right !"
-"True, it doesn't say Small horse..."
-"Yeah.."
-"Years and years of works.. this text.. I've been working on it for a week!"
*laugh*
*satanic chants*
*laughter*